                                                                 Progressive Neural Networks


                                                 Andrei A. Rusu*, Neil C. Rabinowitz*, Guillaume Desjardins*, Hubert Soyer,
                                                   James Kirkpatrick, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Razvan Pascanu, Raia Hadsell
                                                                      * These authors contributed equally to this work
                                                                                    Google DeepMind
                                                                                      London, UK




arXiv:1606.04671v4 [cs.LG] 22 Oct 2022
                                             {andreirusu, ncr, gdesjardins, soyer, kirkpatrick, korayk, razp, raia}@google.com



                                                                                        Abstract
                                                   Learning to solve complex sequences of tasks—while both leveraging transfer and
                                                   avoiding catastrophic forgetting—remains a key obstacle to achieving human-level
                                                   intelligence. The progressive networks approach represents a step forward in this
                                                   direction: they are immune to forgetting and can leverage prior knowledge via
                                                   lateral connections to previously learned features. We evaluate this architecture
                                                   extensively on a wide variety of reinforcement learning tasks (Atari and 3D maze
                                                   games), and show that it outperforms common baselines based on pretraining and
                                                   finetuning. Using a novel sensitivity measure, we demonstrate that transfer occurs
                                                   at both low-level sensory and high-level control layers of the learned policy.


                                         1     Introduction
                                         Finetuning remains the method of choice for transfer learning with neural networks: a model is
                                         pretrained on a source domain (where data is often abundant), the output layers of the model are
                                         adapted to the target domain, and the network is finetuned via backpropagation. This approach was
                                         pioneered in [7] by transferring knowledge from a generative to a discriminative model, and has
                                         since been generalized with great success [11]. Unfortunately, the approach has drawbacks which
                                         make it unsuitable for transferring across multiple tasks: if we wish to leverage knowledge acquired
                                         over a sequence of experiences, which model should we use to initialize subsequent models? This
                                         seems to require not only a learning method that can support transfer learning without catastrophic
                                         forgetting, but also foreknowledge of task similarity. Furthermore, while finetuning may allow us
                                         to recover expert performance in the target domain, it is a destructive process which discards the
                                         previously learned function. One could copy each model before finetuning to explicitly remember all
                                         previous tasks, but the issue of selecting a proper initialization remains. While distillation [8] offers
                                         one potential solution to multitask learning [17], it requires a reservoir of persistent training data for
                                         all tasks, an assumption which may not always hold.
                                         This paper introduces progressive networks, a novel model architecture with explicit support for trans-
                                         fer across sequences of tasks. While finetuning incorporates prior knowledge only at initialization,
                                         progressive networks retain a pool of pretrained models throughout training, and learn lateral connec-
                                         tions from these to extract useful features for the new task. By combining previously learned features
                                         in this manner, progressive networks achieve a richer compositionality, in which prior knowledge is
                                         no longer transient and can be integrated at each layer of the feature hierarchy. Moreover, the addition
                                         of new capacity alongside pretrained networks gives these models the flexibility to both reuse old
                                         computations and learn new ones. As we will show, progressive networks naturally accumulate
                                         experiences and are immune to catastrophic forgetting by design, making them an ideal springboard
                                         for tackling long-standing problems of continual or lifelong learning.
                                         The contributions of this paper are threefold. While many of the individual ingredients used in
                                         progressive nets can be found in the literature, their combination and use in solving complex sequences
of tasks is novel. Second, we extensively evaluate the model in complex reinforcement learning
domains. In the process, we also evaluate alternative approaches to transfer (such as finetuning) within
the RL domain. In particular, we show that progressive networks provide comparable (if not slightly
better) transfer performance to traditional finetuning, but without the destructive consequences.
Finally, we develop a novel analysis based on Fisher Information and perturbation which allows us to
analyse in detail how and where transfer occurs across tasks.

2    Progressive Networks
Continual learning is a long-standing goal of machine learning, where agents not only learn (and
remember) a series of tasks experienced in sequence, but also have the ability to transfer knowledge
from previous tasks to improve convergence speed [20]. Progressive networks integrate these
desiderata directly into the model architecture: catastrophic forgetting is prevented by instantiating
a new neural network (a column) for each task being solved, while transfer is enabled via lateral
connections to features of previously learned columns. The scalability of this approach is addressed
at the end of this section.
A progressive network starts with a single column: a deep neural network having L layers with
                      (1)
hidden activations hi ∈ Rni , with ni the number of units at layer i ≤ L, and parameters Θ(1)
trained to convergence. When switching to a second task, the parameters Θ(1) are “frozen” and a new
                                                                                        (2)
column with parameters Θ(2) is instantiated (with random initialization), where layer hi receives
                  (2)     (1)
input from both hi−1 and hi−1 via lateral connections. This generalizes to K tasks as follows: 1 :
                                                                    
                            (k)           (k) (k)          (k:j) (j) 
                                                     X
                           hi = f Wi hi−1 +             Ui     hi−1 ,                            (1)
                                                                    j<k

          (k)                                                                    (k:j)
where Wi ∈ Rni ×ni−1 is the weight matrix of layer i of column k, Ui      ∈ Rni ×nj are the lateral
connections from layer i − 1 of column j, to layer i of column k and h0 is the network input. f is
an element-wise non-linearity: we use f (x) = max(0, x) for all intermediate layers. A progressive
network with K = 3 is shown in Figure 1.

                                            output1       output2     output3
                                                      a               a


                                               (1)          (2)            (3)
                                              h2           h2             h2
                                                      a               a


                                               (1)          (2)            (3)
                                              h1          h1              h1


                                                          input

Figure 1: Depiction of a three column progressive network. The first two columns on the left (dashed arrows)
were trained on task 1 and 2 respectively. The grey box labelled a represent the adapter layers (see text). A third
column is added for the final task having access to all previously learned features.

These modelling decisions are informed by our desire to: (1) solve K independent tasks at the end of
training; (2) accelerate learning via transfer when possible; and (3) avoid catastrophic forgetting.
In the standard pretrain-and-finetune paradigm, there is often an implicit assumption of “overlap”
between the tasks. Finetuning is efficient in this setting, as parameters need only be adjusted
slightly to the target domain, and often only the top layer is retrained [23]. In contrast, we make
no assumptions about the relationship between tasks, which may in practice be orthogonal or even
adversarial. While the finetuning stage could potentially unlearn these features, this may prove
difficult. Progressive networks side-step this issue by allocating a new column for each new task,
whose weights are initialized randomly. Compared to the task-relevant initialization of pretraining,
   1
     Progressive networks can also be generalized in a straightforward manner to have arbitrary network width
per column/layer, to accommodate varying degrees of task difficulty, or to compile lateral connections from
multiple, independent networks in an ensemble setting. Biases are omitted for clarity.


                                                            2
columns in progressive networks are free to reuse, modify or ignore previously learned features via
                                                     (k:j)
the lateral connections. As the lateral connections Ui     are only from column k to columns j < k,
previous columns are not affected by the newly learned features in the forward pass. Because also the
parameters {Θ(j) ; j < k} are kept frozen (i.e. are constants for the optimizer) when training Θ(k) ,
there is no interference between tasks and hence no catastrophic forgetting.

Application to Reinforcement Learning. Although progressive networks are widely applicable,
this paper focuses on their application to deep reinforcement learning. In this case, each column is
trained to solve a particular Markov Decision Process (MDP): the k-th column thus defines a policy
π (k) (a | s) taking as input a state s given by the environment, and generating probabilities over
                           (k)
actions π (k) (a | s) := hL (s). At each time-step, an action is sampled from this distribution and
taken in the environment, yielding the subsequent state. This policy implicitly defines a stationary
distribution ρπ(k) (s, a) over states and actions.

Adapters. In practice, we augment the progressive network layer of Equation 2 with non-linear lat-
eral connections which we call adapters. They serve both to improve initial conditioning and perform
                                                                    (<k)      (1)      (j)        (k−1)
dimensionality reduction. Defining the vector of anterior features hi−1 = [hi−1 · · · hi−1 · · · hi−1 ]
                     (<k)
of dimensionality ni−1 , in the case of dense layers, we replace the linear lateral connection with a
single hidden layer MLP. Before feeding the lateral activations into the MLP, we multiply them by a
learned scalar, initialized by a random small value. Its role is to adjust for the different scales of the
different inputs. The hidden layer of the non-linear adapter is a projection onto an ni dimensional
subspace. As the index k grows, this ensures that the number of parameters stemming from the lateral
connections is in the same order as Θ(1) . Omitting bias terms, we get:
                                                                              
                          (k)         (k) (k)     (k:j)     (k:j) (<k) (<k)
                         hi = σ Wi hi−1 + Ui            σ(Vi     αi−1 hi−1 ) ,                         (2)
                            (<k)
         (k:j)
where Vi       ∈ Rni−1 ×ni−1 is the projection matrix. For convolutional layers, dimensionality
reduction is performed via 1 × 1 convolutions [10].

Limitations. Progressive networks are a stepping stone towards a full continual learning agent:
they contain the necessary ingredients to learn multiple tasks, in sequence, while enabling transfer
and being immune to catastrophic forgetting. A downside of the approach is the growth in number of
parameters with the number of tasks. The analysis of Appendix 2 reveals that only a fraction of the
new capacity is actually utilized, and that this trend increases with more columns. This suggests that
growth can be addressed, e.g. by adding fewer layers or less capacity, by pruning [9], or by online
compression [17] during learning. Furthermore, while progressive networks retain the ability to solve
all K tasks at test time, choosing which column to use for inference requires knowledge of the task
label. These issues are left as future work.

3   Transfer Analysis
Unlike finetuning, progressive nets do not destroy the features learned on prior tasks. This enables
us to study in detail which features and at which depth transfer actually occurs. We explored two
related methods: an intuitive, but slow method based on a perturbation analysis, and a faster analytical
method derived from the Fisher Information [2].

Average Perturbation Sensitivity (APS). To evaluate the degree to which source columns con-
tribute to the target task, we can inject Gaussian noise at isolated points in the architecture (e.g. a
given layer of a single column) and measure the impact of this perturbation on performance. A
significant drop in performance indicates that the final prediction is heavily reliant on the feature map
or layer. We find that this method yields similar results to the faster Fisher-based method presented
below. We thus relegate details and results of the perturbation analysis to the appendix.

Average Fisher Sensitivity (AFS). We can get a local approximation to the perturbation sensitivity
by using the Fisher Information matrix [2]. While the Fisher matrix is typically computed with
respect to the model parameters, we compute a modified diagonal Fisher F̂ of the network policy π


                                                    3
                                                                    (k)
with respect to the normalized activations 2 at each layer ĥi . For convolutional layers, we define
F̂ to implicitly perform a summation over pixel locations. F̂ can be interpreted as the sensitivity of
the policy to small changes in the representation. We define the diagonal matrix F̂ , having elements
F̂ (m, m), and the derived Average Fisher Sensitivity (AFS) of feature m in layer i of column k as:
                       "                   #
                                                                                   (k)
         (k)             ∂ log π ∂ log π T                                      F̂i (m, m)
       F̂i = Eρ(s,a)          (k)     (k)
                                                       AFS(i,  k, m)       =  P (k)
                          ∂ ĥi   ∂ ĥi                                          k F̂i (m, m)

where the expectation is over the joint state-action distribution ρ(s, a) induced by the progressive
network trained
             P on the target task. In practice, it is often useful to consider the AFS score per-layer
AFS(i, k) = m AFS(i, k, m), i.e. summing over all features of layer i. The AFS and APS thus
estimate how much the network relies on each feature or column in a layer to compute its output.

4         Related Literature
There exist many different paradigms for transfer and multi-task reinforcement learning, as these
have long been recognized as critical challenges in AI research [15, 19, 20]. Many methods for
transfer learning rely on linear and other simple models (e.g. [18]), which is a limiting factor to their
applicability. Recently, there have been new methods proposed for multi-task or transfer learning
with deep RL: [22, 17, 14]. In this work we present an architecture for deep reinforcement learning
that in sequential task regimes that enables learning without forgetting while supporting individual
feature transfer from previous learned tasks.
Pretraining and finetuning was proposed in [7] and applied to transfer learning in [4, 11], generally
in unsupervised-to-supervised or supervised-to-supervised settings. The actor-mimic approach [14]
applied these principles to reinforcement learning, by fine-tuning a DQN multi-task network on new
Atari games and showing that some responded with faster learning, while others did not. Progressive
networks differ from the finetuning direction substantially, since capacity is added as new tasks are
learned.
Progressive nets are related to the incremental and constructive architectures proposed in neural
network literature. The cascade-correlation architecture was designed to eliminate forgetting while
incrementally adding and refining feature extractors [6]. Auto-encoders such as [24] use incremental
feature augmentation to track concept drift, and deep architectures such as [16] have been designed
that specifically support feature transfer. More recently, in [1], columns are separately trained on
individual noise types, then linearly combined, and [5] use columns for image classification. The
block-modular architecture of [21] has many similarities to our approach but focuses on a visual
discrimination task. The progressive net approach, in contrast, uses lateral connections to access
previously learned features for deep compositionality. It can be used in any sequential learning setting
but is especially valuable in RL.

5         Experiments
We evaluate progressive networks across three different RL domains. First, we consider synthetic
versions of Pong, altered to have visual or control-level similarities. Next, we experiment broadly
with random sequences of Atari games and perform a feature-level transfer analysis. Lastly, we
demonstrate performance on a set of 3D maze games. Fig. 2 shows examples from selected tasks.

5.1       Setup

We rely on the Async Advantage Actor-Critic (A3C) framework introduced in [13]. Compared to
DQN [12], the model simultaneously learns a policy and a value function for predicting expected
future rewards. A3C is trained on CPU using multiple threads and has been shown to converge faster
than DQN on GPU. This made it a more natural fit for the large amount of sequential experiments
required for this work.
      2
    The Fisher of individual neurons (fully connected) and feature maps (convolutional layers) are computed
over ρπ(k) (s, a). The use of a normalized representation ĥ is non-standard, but makes the scale of F̂ comparable
across layers and columns.


                                                        4
         (a) Pong variants                          (b) Labyrinth games                             (c) Atari games
Figure 2: Samples from different task domains: (a) Pong variants include flipped, noisy, scaled, and recoloured
transforms; (b) Labyrinth is a set of 3D maze games with diverse level maps and diverse positive and negative
reward items; (c) Atari games offer a more challenging setting for transfer.



We report results by averaging the top 3 out of 25 jobs, each having different seeds and random
hyper-parameter sampling. Performance is evaluated by measuring the area under the learning curve
(average score per episode during training), rather than final score. The transfer score is then defined
as the relative performance of an architecture compared with a single column baseline, trained only
on the target task (baseline 1). We present transfer score curves for selected source-target games, and
summarize all such pairs in transfer matrices. Models and baselines we consider are illustrated in
Figure 3. Details of the experimental setup are provided in section 3 of the Appendix.


                                                                                                                  source task


                                                                                                                  target task


                                                                                                                   random
          input            input           input            input              input               input

        (1) Baseline 1 (2) Baseline 2   (3) Baseline 3   (4) Baseline 4 (5) Progressive Net (6) Progressive Net
                                                                             2 columns           3 columns         frozen

Figure 3: Illustration of different baselines and architectures. Baseline 1 is a single column trained on the target
task; baseline 2 is a single column, pretrained on a source task and finetuned on the target task (output layer
only); baseline 3 is the same as baseline 2 but the whole model is finetuned; and baseline 4 is a 2 column
progressive architecture, with previous column(s) initialized randomly and frozen.



5.2   Pong Soup

The first evaluation domain is a set of synthetic variants of the Atari game of Pong ("Pong Soup")
where the visuals and gameplay have been altered, thus providing a setting where we can be confident
that there are transferable aspects of the tasks. The variants are Noisy (frozen Gaussian noise is added
to the inputs); Black (black background); White (white background); Zoom (input is scaled by 75%
and translated); V-flip, H-flip, and VH-flip (input is horizontally and/or vertically flipped). Example
frames are shown in Fig. 2. The results of training two columns on the Pong variants, including all
relevant baselines are shown in Figure 4. Transfer scores are summarized over all target tasks in
Table 1.




Figure 4: (a) Transfer matrix. Colours indicate transfer scores (clipped at 2). For progressive nets, the first
column is trained on Pong, Noisy, or H-flip (table rows); the second column is trained on each of the other pong
variants (table columns). (b) Example learning curves.


                                                                    5
We can make several observations from these results. Baseline 2 (single column, only output layer is
finetuned; see Fig. 3) fails to learn the target task in most experiments and thus has negative transfer.
This approach is quite standard in supervised learning settings, where features from ImageNet-trained
nets are routinely repurposed for new domains. As expected, we observe high positive transfer with
baseline 3 (single column, full finetuning), a well established paradigm for transfer. Progressive
networks outperform this baseline however in terms of both median and mean score, with the
difference being more pronounced for the latter. As the mean is more sensitive to outliers, this
suggests that progressive networks are better able to exploit transfer when transfer is possible (i.e.
when source and target domains are compatible). Fig. 4 (b) lends weight to this hypothesis, where
progressive networks are shown to significantly outperform the baselines for particular game pairs.
Progressive nets also compare favourably to baseline 4, confirming that progressive nets are indeed
taking advantage of the features learned in previous columns.
Detailed analysis




Figure 5: (a) Transfer analysis for 2-column nets on Pong variants. The relative sensitivity of the network’s
outputs on the columns within each layer (the AFS) is indicated by the darkness of shading. (b) AFS values
for the 8 feature maps of conv. 1 of a 1-column Pong net. Only one feature map is effectively used by the net;
the same map is also used by the 2-column versions. Below: spatial filter components (red = positive, blue =
negative). (c) Activation maps of the filter in (b) from example states of the four games.

We use the metric derived in Sec. 3 to analyse what features are being transferred between Pong
variants. We see that when switching from Pong to H-Flip, the network reuses the same components
of low and mid-level vision (the outputs of the two convolutional layers; Figure 5a). However, the
fully connected layer must be largely re-learned, as the policy relevant features of the task (the relative
locations/velocities of the paddle and ball) are now in a new location. When switching from Pong
to Zoom, on the other hand, low-level vision is reused for the new task, but new mid-level vision
features are learned. Interestingly, only one low-level feature appears to be reused: (see Fig. 5b): this
is a spatio-temporal filter with a considerable temporal DC component. This appears sufficient for
detecting both ball motion and paddle position in the original, flipped, and zoomed Pongs.
Finally, when switching from Pong to Noisy, some new low-level vision is relearned. This is likely
because the first layer filter learned on the clean task is not sufficiently tolerant to the added noise.
In contrast, this problem does not apply when moving from Noisy to Pong (Figure 5a, rightmost
column), where all of vision transfers to the new task.

5.3   Atari Games

We next investigate feature transfer between randomly selected Atari games [3]. This is an interesting
question, because the visuals of Atari games are quite different from each other, as are the controls
and required strategy. Though games like Pong and Breakout are conceptually similar (both involve
hitting a ball with a paddle), Pong is vertically aligned while Breakout is horizontal: a potentially
insurmountable feature-level difference. Other Atari game pairs have no discernible overlap, even at
a conceptual level.
To this end we start by training single columns on three source games (Pong, River Raid, and
Seaquest) 3 and assess if the learned features transfer to a different subset of randomly selected
target games (Alien, Asterix, Boxing, Centipede, Gopher, Hero, James Bond, Krull, Robotank, Road
Runner, Star Gunner, and Wizard of Wor). We evaluate progressive networks with 2, 3 and 4 columns,
     3
       Progressive columns having more than one “source” column are trained sequentially on these source games,
i.e. Seaquest-River Raid-Pong means column 1 is first trained on Seaquest, column 2 is added afterwards and
trained on River Raid, and then column 3 added and trained on Pong.


                                                      6
        Figure 6: Transfer scores and example learning curves for Atari target games, as per Figure 4.


                             Pong Soup                      Atari                     Labyrinth
                       Mean (%) Median (%)          Mean (%) Median (%)          Mean (%) Median (%)
   Baseline 1                 100            100          100             100          100               100
   Baseline 2                  35              7           41              21           88                85
   Baseline 3                 181            160          133             110          235               112
   Baseline 4                 134            131           96              95          185               108
   Progressive 2 col          209            169          132             112          491               115
   Progressive 3 col          222            183          140             111           —                 —
   Progressive 4 col           —              —           141             116           —                 —
               Table 1: Transfer percentages in three domains. Baselines are defined in Fig. 3.




comparing to the baselines of Figure 3). The transfer matrix and selected transfer curves are shown
in Figure 6, and the results summarized in Table 1.
Across all games, we observe from Fig. 6, that progressive nets result in positive transfer in 8 out
of 12 target tasks, with only two cases of negative transfer. This compares favourably to baseline
3, which yields positive transfer in only 5 of 12 games. This trend is reflected in Table 1, where
progressive networks convincingly outperform baseline 3 when using additional columns. This is
especially promising as we show in the Appendix that progressive network use a diminishing amount
of capacity with each added column, pointing a clear path to online compression or pruning as a
means to mitigate the growth in model size.
Now consider the specific sequence Seaquest-to-Gopher, an example of two dissimilar games. Here,
the pretrain/finetune paradigm (baseline 3) exhibits negative transfer, unlike progressive networks
(see Fig.6b, bottom), perhaps because they are more able to ignore the irrelevant features. For the
sequence Seaquest[+River Raid][+Pong]-to-Boxing, using additional columns in the progressive
networks can yield a significant increase in transfer (see Fig. 6b, top).
Detailed Analysis
Figure 6 demonstrates that both positive and negative transfer is possible with progressive nets. To
differentiate these cases, we consider the Average Fisher Sensitivity for the 3 column case (e.g., see
Fig. 7a). A clear pattern emerges amongst these and other examples: the most negative transfer
coincides with complete dependence on the convolutional layers of the previous columns, and no
learning of new visual features in the new column. In contrast, the most positive transfer occurs
when the features of the first two columns are augmented by new features. The statistics across all
3-column nets (Figure 7b) show that positive transfer in Atari occurs at a "sweet spot" between heavy
reliance on features from the source task, and heavy reliance on all new features for the target task.
At first glance, this result appears unintuitive: if a progressive net finds a valuable feature set from a
source task, shouldn’t we expect a high degree of transfer? We offer two hypotheses. First, this may
simply reflect an optimization difficulty, where the source features offer fast convergence to a poor
local minimum. This is a known challenge in transfer learning [20]: learned source tasks confer an
inductive bias that can either help or hinder in different cases. Second, this may reflect a problem of


                                                      7
Figure 7: (a) AFS scores for 3-column nets with lowest (left) and highest (right) transfer scores on the 12 target
Atari games. (b) Transfer statistics across 72 three-column nets, as a function of the mean AFS across the three
convolutional layers of the new column (i.e. how much new vision is learned).


exploration, where the transfered representation is "good enough" for a functional, but sub-optimal
policy.

5.4   Labyrinth

The final experimental setting for progressive networks is Labyrinth, a 3D maze environment where
the inputs are rendered images granting partial observability and the agent outputs discrete actions,
including looking up, down, left, or right and moving forward, backwards, left, or right. The tasks as
well as the level maps are diverse and involve getting positive scores for ‘eating’ good items (apples,
strawberries) and negative scores for eating bad items (mushrooms, lemons). Details can be found
in the appendix. While there is conceptual and visual overlap between the different tasks, the tasks
present a challenging set of diverse game elements (Figure 2).




Figure 8: Transfer scores and example learning curves for Labyrinth tasks. Colours indicate transfer (clipped at
2). The learning curves show two examples of two-column progressive performance vs. baselines 1 and 3.

As in the other domains, the progressive approach yields more positive transfer than any of the
baselines (see Fig. 8a and Table 1). We observe less transfer on the Seek Track levels, which have
dense reward items throughout the maze and are easily learned. Note that even for these easy cases,
baseline 2 shows negative transfer because it cannot learn new low-level visual features, which
are important because the reward items change from task to task. The learning curves in Fig. 8b
exemplify the typical results seen in this domain: on simpler games, such as Track 1 and 2, learning
is rapid and stable by all agents. On more difficult games, with more complex game structure, the
baselines struggle and progressive nets have an advantage.

6     Conclusion
Continual learning, the ability to accumulate and transfer knowledge to new domains, is a core
characteristic of intelligent beings. Progressive neural networks are a stepping stone towards continual
learning, and this work has demonstrated their potential through experiments and analysis across
three RL domains, including Atari, which contains orthogonal or even adversarial tasks. We believe
that we are the first to show positive transfer in deep RL agents within a continual learning framework.
Moreover, we have shown that the progressive approach is able to effectively exploit transfer for
compatible source and task domains; that the approach is robust to harmful features learned in
incompatible tasks; and that positive transfer increases with the number of columns, thus corroborating
the constructive, rather than destructive, nature of the progressive architecture.


                                                        8
References
 [1] Forest Agostinelli, Michael R Anderson, and Honglak Lee. Adaptive multi-column deep neural networks
     with application to robust image denoising. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2013.
 [2] Shun-ichi Amari. Natural gradient works efficiently in learning. Neural Computation, 1998.
 [3] M. G. Bellemare, Y. Naddaf, J. Veness, and M. Bowling. The arcade learning environment: An evaluation
     platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research (JAIR), 47:253–279, 2013.
 [4] Yoshua Bengio. Deep learning of representations for unsupervised and transfer learning. In JMLR:
     Workshop on Unsupervised and Transfer Learning, 2012.
 [5] Dan C. Ciresan, Ueli Meier, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Multi-column deep neural networks for image
     classification. In Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2012.
 [6] Scott E. Fahlman and Christian Lebiere. The cascade-correlation learning architecture. In Advances in
     Neural Information Processing Systems, 1990.
 [7] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov. Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks. Science,
     313(5786):504–507, July 2006.
 [8] Goeff Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. CoRR,
     abs/1503.02531, 2015.
 [9] Yann LeCun, John S. Denker, and Sara A. Solla. Optimal brain damage. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 1990.
[10] Min Lin, Qiang Chen, and Shuicheng Yan. Network in network. In Proc. of Int’l Conference on Learning
     Representations (ICLR), 2013.
[11] G. Mesnil, Y. Dauphin, X. Glorot, S. Rifai, Y. Bengio, I. Goodfellow, E. Lavoie, X. Muller, G. Desjardins,
     D. Warde-Farley, P. Vincent, A. Courville, and J. Bergstra. Unsupervised and transfer learning challenge: a
     deep learning approach. In JMLR W& CP: Proc. of the Unsupervised and Transfer Learning challenge
     and workshop, volume 27, 2012.
[12] V. Mnih, Kk Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller,
     A. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski, S. Petersen, C. Beattie, A. Sadik, I. Antonoglou, H. King, D. Kumaran,
     D. Wierstra, S. Legg, and D. Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature,
     518(7540):529–533, 2015.
[13] Volodymyr Mnih, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Tim
     Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In
     Int’l Conf. on Machine Learning (ICML), 2016.
[14] Emilio Parisotto, Lei Jimmy Ba, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Actor-mimic: Deep multitask and transfer
     reinforcement learning. In Proc. of Int’l Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.
[15] Mark B. Ring. Continual Learning in Reinforcement Environments. R. Oldenbourg Verlag, 1995.
[16] Artem Rozantsev, Mathieu Salzmann, and Pascal Fua. Beyond sharing weights for deep domain adaptation.
     CoRR, abs/1603.06432, 2016.
[17] A. Rusu, S. Colmenarejo, Ç. Gülçehre, G. Desjardins, J. Kirkpatrick, R. Pascanu, V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu,
     and R. Hadsell. Policy distillation. abs/1511.06295, 2016.
[18] Paul Ruvolo and Eric Eaton. Ella: An efficient lifelong learning algorithm. In Proceedings of the 30th
     International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-13), June 2013.
[19] Daniel L. Silver, Qiang Yang, and Lianghao Li. Lifelong machine learning systems: Beyond learning
     algorithms. In AAAI Spring Symposium: Lifelong Machine Learning, 2013.
[20] Matthew E. Taylor and Peter Stone. An introduction to inter-task transfer for reinforcement learning. AI
     Magazine, 32(1):15–34, 2011.
[21] Alexander V. Terekhov, Guglielmo Montone, and J. Kevin O’Regan. Knowledge Transfer in Deep
     Block-Modular Neural Networks, pages 268–279. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2015.
[22] C. Tessler, S. Givony, T. Zahavy, D. J. Mankowitz, and S. Mannor. A Deep Hierarchical Approach to
     Lifelong Learning in Minecraft. ArXiv e-prints, 2016.
[23] Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Yoshua Bengio, and Hod Lipson. How transferable are features in deep neural
     networks? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 3320–3328, 2014.
[24] Guanyu Zhou, Kihyuk Sohn, and Honglak Lee. Online incremental feature learning with denoising
     autoencoders. In Proc. of Int’l Conf. on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), pages 1453–1461,
     2012.


                                                       9
Supplementary Material
A     Perturbation Analysis
We explored two related methods for analysing transfer in progressive networks. One based on Fisher information
yields the Average Fisher Sensitivity (AFS) and is described in Section 3 of the paper. We describe the second
method based on perturbation analysis in this appendix, as it proved too slow to use at scale. Given its intuitive
appeal however, we provide details of the method along with results on Pong Variants (see Section 5.2), as a
means to corroborate the AFS score.
Our perturbation analysis aims to estimate which components of the source columns materially contribute to
the performance of the final column on the target tasks. To this end, we injected Gaussian noise into each of
the (post-ReLU) hidden representations, with a new sample on every forward pass, and calculated the average
effect of these perturbations on the game score over 10 episodes. We did this at a coarse scale, by adding noise
across all features of a given layer, though a fine scale analysis is also possible per feature (map). In order to be
invariant to any arbitrary scale factors in the network weights, we scale the noise variance proportional to the
variance of the activations in each feature map and fully-connected neuron. Scaling the variance in this manner
is analogous to computing the Fisher w.r.t. normalized activations for the AFS score.




Figure 9: (a) Perturbation analysis for the two second-layer convolutional representations in the two columns of
the Pong/Pong-noise net. Blue: adding noise to second convolutional layer from column 1; green: from column
2. Grey line determines critical noise magnitude for each representation, σi2 . (b-c) Comparison of per-layer
sensitivities obtained using the APS method (b) and the AFS method (c; as per main text). These are highly
similar.

         (k)        2(k)
Define Λi = 1/σi      as the precision of the noise injected at layer i of column k, which results in a 50% drop
in performance. The Average Perturbation Sensitivity (APS) for this layer is simply:
                                                                 (k)
                                                           Λ
                                              APS(i, k) = P i (k)                                                (3)
                                                           k Λi

Note that this value is normalized across columns for a given layer. The APS score can thus be interpreted as the
responsibility of each column in a given layer to final performance. The APS score of 2-column progressive
networks trained on Pong Variants is shown in Fig9 (b). These clearly corroborate the AFS shown in (c).


B    Compressibility of Progressive Networks
As described in the main text, one of the limitations of progressive networks is the growth in the size of the
network with added tasks. In the basic approach we pursue in the main text, the number of hidden units and
feature maps grows linearly with the number of columns, and the number of parameters grows quadratically.
Here, we sought to determine the degree to which this full capacity is actually used by the network. We leveraged
the Average Fisher Sensitivity measure to study how increasing the number of columns in the Atari task set
changes the need for additional resources. In Figure 10a, we measure the average fractional use of existing


                                                         1
feature maps in a given layer (here, layer 2). We do this for each network by concatenating the per-feature-map
AFS values from all source columns in this layer, sorting the values to produce a spectrum, and then averaging
across networks. We find that as the number of columns increases, the average spectrum becomes sparser: the
network relies on a smaller proportion of features from the source columns. Similar results were found for all
layers.
Similarly, in Figure 10b, we measure the capacity required in the final added column as a function of the total
number of columns. Again, we measure the spectrum of AFS values in an example layer, but here from only
the final column. As the progressive network grows, the new column’s features are both less important overall
(indicated by the declining area under the graph), and have a sparser AFS spectrum. Combined, these results
suggest that significant pruning of lateral connections is possible, and the quadratic growth of parameters might
be contained.




Figure 10: (a) Spectra of AFS values (for layer 2) across all feature maps from source columns, for the Atari
dataset. The spectra show the range of AFS values, and are averaged across networks. While the 2 column / 3
column / 4 column nets all have different values of Nmaps (here, 12, 24, and 36 respectively), these have been
dilated to fit the same axis to show the proportional use of these maps. (b) Spectra of AFS values (for layer 2)
for the feature maps from only the final column.



C     Setup Details
In our grid we sample hyper-parameters from categorical distributions:
        • Learning rate was sampled from {10−3 , 5 · 10−4 , 10−4 }.
        • Strength of the entropy regularization from {10−2 , 10−3 , 10−4 }
        • Gradient clipping cut-off from {20, 40}
        • scalar multiplier on the lateral feature is initialized randomly to one from {1, 10−1 , 10−2 }
For the Atari experiments we used a model with 3 convolutional layers followed by a fully connected layer
and from which we predict the policy and value function. The convolutional layers are as follows. All have 12
feature maps. The first convolutional layer has a kernel of size 8x8 and a stride of 4x4. The second layer has a
kernel of size 4 and a stride of 2. The last convolutional layer has size 3x4 with a stride of 1. The fully connected
layer has 256 hidden units.
Learning follows closely the paradigm described in [13]. We use 16 workers and the same RMSProp algorithm
without momentum or centring of the variance. The score for each point of a training curve is the average over
all the episodes the model gets to finish in 25e4 environment steps.
The whole experiments are run for a maximum of 1.6e8 environment step. The agent has an action repeat of 4
as in [13], which means that for 4 consecutive steps the agent will use the same action picked at the beginning
of the series. For this reason through out the paper we actually report results in terms of agent perceived steps
rather than environment steps. That is, the maximal number of agent perceived step that we do for any particular
run is 4e7.


D     Learning curves
Figure 11 shows training curves for all the target games in the Atari domain. We plot learning curves for two
column, three column and four column progressive networks alongside Baseline 3 (gray dashed line), a model
pretrained on Seaquest and then finetuned on the particular target game and Baseline 1 (gray dotted line), where
a single column is trained on the source game Seaquest.
We can see that overall baseline 3 performs well. However there are situations when having features learned
from more previous task actually helps with transfer (e.g. when target game is Boxing).


                                                         2
                      Target game: alien                                   Target game: asterix                                        Target game: boxing
                                                                                                                   100
         2500
                                                            10000
                                                                                                                   80
         2000
                                                            8000
                                                                                                                   60

 score                                              score                                                  score
         1500
                                                            6000
                                                                                                                   40
         1000
                                                            4000
                                                                                                                   20
          500                                               2000
                                                                                                                    0
              0.0                             4.0               0.0                                  4.0             0.0                                                       4.0
                            steps            1e7                                  steps             1e7                                          steps                        1e7

                    Target game: centipede                                Target game: gopher                                            Target game: hero

                                                            6000                                                   30000
         6000
                                                            5000                                                   25000
         5000                                                                                                      20000
 score                                              score                                                  score
                                                            4000

         4000                                               3000                                                   15000

                                                            2000                                                   10000
         3000
                                                            1000                                                   5000
         2000
            0.0                               4.0              0.0                                   4.0                    0.0                                                4.0
                            steps            1e7                                 steps              1e7                                           steps                       1e7

                    Target game: jamesbond                                  Target game: krull                                       Target game: road runner
                                                                                                                   40000
         2500                                               10000
                                                                                                                   35000
         2000                                               8000                                                   30000
                                                                                                                   25000

 score                                              score                                                  score
         1500
                                                            6000                                                   20000
         1000                                                                                                      15000
                                                            4000                                                   10000
          500
                                                                                                                    5000
                                                            2000
                                                                                                                            0
              0.0                             4.0               0.0                                  4.0                    0.0                                                4.0
                            steps            1e7                                  steps             1e7                                           steps                       1e7

                    Target game: robotank                                Target game: star gunner
                                                            40000                                                                    Target game: wizard of wor
         30                                                                                                                 7000
                                                            35000
                                                                                                                            6000
         25                                                 30000
                                                                                                                            5000
         20                                                 25000
 score                                              score
                                                                                                                    score
                                                                                                                            4000
                                                            20000                                                           3000
         15
                                                            15000                                                           2000
         10                                                 10000                                                           1000

          5                                                  5000                                                              0.0                                   4.0
                                                                                                                                               steps              1e7
                                                                                                                    Baseline 1                  seaquest+riverraid - Prog. 3 col
          0.0                                 4.0                  0.0                               4.0            Baseline 3                  seaquest+riverraid+pong - Prog. 4 col
                           steps             1e7                                  steps             1e7             seaquest - Prog. 2 col




Figure 11: Training curves for transferring to the target games after seeing first Seaquest followed by River Raid
and lastly Pong. For the baselines, the source game used for pretraining is Seaquest.


Figure 12 shows how two-column progressive networks perform as compared to Baseline 3 (gray dashed line), a
model pretrained on the source game, here standard Pong, and then finetuned on a particular target game, and
Baseline 1 (black dotted line), where a single column is trained on standard Pong. Figure 13 shows two-column
progressive networks and baselines on Labyrinth tasks; the source game was Maze Y.


E             Labyrinth
Section 5.4 evaluates progressive networks on foraging tasks in complex 3D maze environments. Positive
rewards are given to the agent for collecting apples and strawberries, and negative rewards for mushrooms and
lemons. Episodes terminate when either all (positive) rewards are collected, or after a fixed time interval.
Levels differ in their maze layout, the type of items present and the sparsity of the reward structure. The levels
we employed can be characterized as follows:
                • Seek Track 1: simple corridor with many apples
                • Seek Track 2: U-shaped corridor with many strawberries
                • Seek Track 3: Ω-shaped, with 90o turns, with few apples
                • Seek Track 4: Ω-shaped, with 45o turns, with few apples
                • Seek Avoid 1: large square room with apples and lemons
                • Seek Avoid 2: large square room with apples and mushrooms
                • Seek Maze M : M-shaped maze, with apples at dead-ends
                • Seek Maze Y : Y-shaped maze, with apples at dead-ends




                                                                           3
                    Target: Pong                                                Target: Black
         20                                                       20


         10                                                       10



score     0                                              score     0


        −10                                                      −10


        −20                                                      −20
           0.0                                 4.0                  0.0                                     4.0
                            steps                                                      steps


                   Target: H-flip                                              Target: HV-flip
         20                                                       20


         10                                                       10



score     0                                              score
                                                                   0


        −10                                                      −10


        −20                                                      −20
           0.0                                 4.0                  0.0                                     4.0
                            steps                                                      steps


                   Target: Noisy                                                Target: V-flip
         20                                                       20


         10                                                       10



score     0                                              score     0


        −10                                                      −10


        −20                                                      −20
           0.0                                 4.0                  0.0                                     4.0
                            steps                                                      steps


                   Target: White                                                Target: Zoom

         15                                                       15
         10                                                       10
          5
                                                                   5

score
          0
                                                         score
                                                                   0
         −5
                                                                  −5
        −10
                                                                 −10
        −15
                                                                 −15
        −20
           0.0                                 4.0               −20
                            steps                                   0.0                                     4.0
                                                                          Baseline 1   Baseline 3   Prog. 2 col.



         Figure 12: Training curves for transferring to 8 target games after learning standard Pong first.




                                                        4
                        Target: Track 1                                                  Target: Track 2
        25
                                                                       80
                                                                       70
        20
                                                                       60

score                                                          score
        15                                                             50
                                                                       40

        10                                                             30
                                                                       20
            5                                                          10
            0.0                                      4.0                   0.0                                         4.0
                                 steps                                                          steps


                        Target: Track 3                                                  Target: Track 4
                                                                       8
        8

        7                                                              7

        6                                                              6

score
        5
                                                               score
                                                                       5
        4
                                                                       4
        3
                                                                       3
        2

        1                                                              2
         0.0                                         4.0
                                steps                                  0.0                                             4.0
                                                                                  Baseline 1    Baseline 3   Prog. 2 col.


                        Target: Avoid 1                                                 Target: Avoid 2
                                                                           40

        25
                                                                           30

        20
                                                                           20

score   15
                                                               score       10

        10
                                                                            0

            5
                                                                       −10

            0.0                                      4.0                    0.0                                        4.0
                                 steps                                                           steps


                        Target: Maze Y                                                  Target: Maze M
                                                                       7
        3.5

        3.0                                                            6

        2.5                                                            5

score
                                                               score
        2.0                                                            4

        1.5                                                            3

        1.0                                                            2
        0.5                                                            1
                0.0                                  4.0
                                 steps                                 0.0                                             4.0
                                                                                  Baseline 1    Baseline 3   Prog. 2 col.



                  Figure 13: Training curves for transferring to 8 target games after learning Maze Y first.




                                                              5
